component metadata: add translation docs (#498)
mavlink/mavlink-devguide: en/services/component_information.md

A GCS can provide a UI for testing outputs based on the configured output functions, by iterating over all output channels and collecting the configured actuator output functions, and then utilizing the `MAV_CMD_ACTUATOR_TEST` command.

## Translation

> High-level, translation works as following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At high-level, metadata translation works as following:
```

> - The metadata provider sets the `translationUri` in [general metadata file](#COMP_METADATA_TYPE_GENERAL). There is no CRC as translations might change independently of metadata. Each metadata type has its own url.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The metadata provider sets the `translationUri` in [general metadata file](#COMP_METADATA_TYPE_GENERAL) for each metadata type that supports translation.
  There is no CRC for the resource pointed to by this URI, as translations might change independently of metadata (for example, adding or changing translations for a particular language, or adding translations for a new language).
```

> - This url points to a summary json file, containing links and modification timestamps to individual language files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `translationUri` URL points to a summary JSON file that contains links and modification timestamps for the individual translation files supplied for each translated language (for the particular metadata type).
```

> - The metadata provider sets the `translationUri` in [general metadata file](#COMP_METADATA_TYPE_GENERAL). There is no CRC as translations might change independently of metadata. Each metadata type has its own url.
> - This url points to a summary json file, containing links and modification timestamps to individual language files.
> - The client (GCS) then downloads the summary file, and the translation file(s) it is interested in. The translation file is a (compressed) .TS file.
> - The client translates the metadata json file(s) (which contains annotations for which tags to translate) using the translation TS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The metadata provider sets the `translationUri` in [general metadata file](#COMP_METADATA_TYPE_GENERAL) for each metadata type that supports translation.
  There is no CRC for the resource pointed to by this URI, as translations might change independently of metadata (for example, adding or changing translations for a particular language, or adding translations for a new language).
- The `translationUri` URL points to a summary JSON file that contains links to the separate files that contain each translation of the particular metadata type.
  The translation summary JSON file also contains modification timestamps for each linked translation file so that a GCS can determine whether the file has been updated.
  The translation files are a (compressed) file in [TS file format](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/linguist-ts-file-format.html).
- A client (GCS) downloads the summary file then uses its contained to locate and download the translation file(s) it is interested in.
- The client can then apply the downloaded translations to the metadata json file(s) (which contains annotations for which tags to translate) using the translation TS.
```

A GCS can provide a UI for testing outputs based on the configured output functions, by iterating over all output channels and collecting the configured actuator output functions, and then utilizing the `MAV_CMD_ACTUATOR_TEST` command.

## Translation

> At high-level, metadata translation works as following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At high-level, metadata translation works as follows:
```

- The metadata provider sets the `translationUri` in [general metadata file](#COMP_METADATA_TYPE_GENERAL) for each metadata type that supports translation.
  There is no CRC for the resource pointed to by this URI, as translations might change independently of metadata (for example, adding or changing translations for a particular language, or adding translations for a new language).
- The `translationUri` URL points to a summary JSON file that contains links to the separate files that contain each translation of the particular metadata type.
  The translation summary JSON file also contains modification timestamps for each linked translation file so that a GCS can determine whether the file has been updated.
  The translation files are a (compressed) file in [TS file format](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/linguist-ts-file-format.html).
- A client (GCS) downloads the summary file then uses its contained to locate and download the translation file(s) it is interested in.

> - The client can then apply the downloaded translations to the metadata json file(s) (which contains annotations for which tags to translate) using the translation TS.

Reviewer: It is not clear exactly what you are saying here by "using the translation TS". Don't the translated files you get provide enough context to create a translated version of the original? 

We could invert all this and say something like:

- The translation system creates a translation source file for each metadata JSON file in TS file format, using the XXX toolchain to extract appropriate tags using annotations in the metadata files.
  The TS file format is a well understood translation format, with good tooling and wide support in translation services.
- This translation file is translated, creating individual files for each language in the TS file format.
- A summary file is created that provides URL links to each of the translation files, along with a modification date for each file.
- The URL is provided to clients in the `translationUri` field in the ...

Just a thought.

Author: Yes, correct. The wording is a bit off I guess.
Sure, we can also go with that.

Reviewer: I think it's OK as is. I'll just tidy the errors I injected ...
```suggestion
- The client can then apply the downloaded translations to the metadata json file(s) (which contains annotations for which tags to translate).
```

### Caching

> The following caching strategy is recommended for clients:
> 
> - locally cache the downloaded files for 3 days before re-checking
> - after 3 days try to download the summary again, and if no internet connection, keep using the cached version
> - the translation files can either be downloaded whenever the summary is downloaded or by checking the modification timestamp in the summary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following caching strategy is recommended for clients:

- Locally cache the downloaded translation files.
  These should be used until successfully replaced with a newer version.
- After 3 days attempt to download the summary JSON file again.
- Translation files can either be downloaded whenever the summary is downloaded or only when needed (because a modification timestamp has changed in the summary).
```

The translation section follows [this schema](https://github.com/mavlink/mavlink/blob/master/component_metadata/translation.schema.json), which is used to extract the translation strings into a TS file (see below for a script), and by the client to know which strings to translate.
The TS file may be xz compressed.

This allows to add new metadata without having to change the translation implementation in the client.

The summary json has the following form:

```json
{
    "<locale>": {
        "url": "<file url>.ts.xz",
        "last-modified": "<ISO 8601 timestamp>"
    },
    // ...
}
```

For example:

```json
{
    "fr_FR": {
        "url": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PX4/PX4-Metadata-Translations/main/translated/parameters_fr_FR.ts.xz",
        "last-modified": "2023-03-22T06:15:59.203476+00:00"
    },
    "de_DE": {
        "url": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PX4/PX4-Metadata-Translations/main/translated/parameters_de_DE.ts.xz",
        "last-modified": "2023-03-22T06:15:59.199476+00:00"
    }
}
```

### Hosting Translations

> Any server can be used to host translations. The following example is based on github.com, as it is easy to set up, automate and download files.
> 
> Example repository: https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Metadata-Translations
> 
> - It contains the untranslated metadata in `metadata/`
> - From that, `scripts/prepare_ts.py` is used to convert the metadata into a TS file (under `to_translate`)
> - A translation service, such as [crowdin](https://crowdin.com/) can be used to translate the files
> - The translated files are synced back to `translated/`
> - `scripts/update_summary.py` is executed to update the summary json file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any server can be used to host translations.
The following example uses github.com, as it is easy to set up, automate, and download files.

The example repository is https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Metadata-Translations:

- `metadata/` contains the untranslated metadata JSON files.
- `to_translate` contains the TS files to translate.
   This is generated from the files in `metadata/` using `scripts/prepare_ts.py`.
- A translation service, such as [crowdin](https://crowdin.com/) can be used to translate the files
- `translated/` contains translated metadata TS files (in this case synced back from Crowdin)
- `scripts/update_summary.py` is executed to update the summary JSON file with translation file locations and modification dates.
```

A GCS can provide a UI for testing outputs based on the configured output functions, by iterating over all output channels and collecting the configured actuator output functions, and then utilizing the `MAV_CMD_ACTUATOR_TEST` command.

## Translation

At high-level, metadata translation works as follows:

- The metadata provider sets the `translationUri` in [general metadata file](#COMP_METADATA_TYPE_GENERAL) for each metadata type that supports translation.

>   There is no CRC for the resource pointed to by this URI, as translations might change independently of metadata (for example, adding or changing translations for a particular language, or adding translations for a new language).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Note that the URL has no associated CRC as the translation data can change independently of metadata (for example, adding or changing translations).
```

- The `translationUri` URL points to a summary JSON file that contains links to the separate files that contain each translation of the particular metadata type.

>   The translation summary JSON file also contains modification timestamps for each linked translation file so that a GCS can determine whether the file has been updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The translation summary JSON file also contains modification timestamps for each linked translation file so that a GCS can determine whether a particular file has been updated.
```

>   The translation files are a (compressed) file in [TS file format](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/linguist-ts-file-format.html).

Reviewer: @bkueng Is this correct?
(i.e. compression format). Not so concerned about this as it is Internet to GCS.
```suggestion
  The translation files are in [TS file format](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/linguist-ts-file-format.html) and may optionally, also be compressed in .bz format.
```

Author: `.xz`
Yes it is less relevant, but still, it might be a verbose xml file.

Reviewer: Thanks. But should this be optional or mandatory? If optional then text above good, if not optional:

```suggestion
  The translation files are .bz compressed in [TS file format](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/linguist-ts-file-format.html).
```

Author: We can make it optional, it's easy to handle both in the receiver. And it should be `xz` not `bz`

> - A client (GCS) downloads the summary file then uses its contained to locate and download the translation file(s) it is interested in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A client (GCS) downloads the summary file then uses its to locate and download the translation file(s) it is interested in.
```

- The client can then apply the downloaded translations to the metadata json file(s) (which contains annotations for which tags to translate) using the translation TS.

### Caching

The following caching strategy is recommended for clients:

- Locally cache the downloaded translation files.
  These should be used until successfully replaced with a newer version.

> - After 3 days attempt to download the summary JSON file again.

Reviewer: I assume you actually do the check when you start QGC. So the actual update rate is 3 days + when you start GCS and it happens to have connectivity? Is that right? If so, perhaps we should note that.

Author: It's upon vehicle connection initialization, when receiving the metadata.

> For example what happens if you connect to the vehicle but there is no internet connection initially - do you cache that the vehicle connected and add that to your download list for later?

No, but that's a possible extension.
